(techno-pop music)
Alright now we're gonna start
the section of the course where we learn about
objects and arrays.
So first let's learn about objects.
Objects are another fundamental building block
of JavaScript.
Just like we have strings, and numbers, and booleans.
We have objects and you're actually, you will soon find out
that actually everything in JavaScript is an object.
So, what are they?
Well objects allow us to
group together properties and values,
or keys and values is often what we call it.
I'll be saying properties and values in this course.
And they have many uses from storing related data,
from storing functionality,
all the way through creating your own custom types.
It's important to note that
objects are used for where
the order of the properties does not matter.
Now that's really important to note
because if the order of the properties in your objects,
so if we were creating a person,
let's just go ahead and do that.
So a const person is equal to curly brackets.
And we same name is equal to Wes.
And age is equal to 100.
If I were to console log that person
it's probably going to be in the order of name and age.
Let's see here.
There we go.
Right?
And if I were to re-order them
put a commma there
and refresh.
Now it does show me age and name;
however,
just because the JavaScript interpreter does that
it's not guaranteed.
So never rely on the order at which you've put
the properties into the object
to be maintained the same way.
I've definitely seen it in different browsers
in different orders
and that's totally okay.
Now, to create an object
you generally are gonna do this.
You open up a curly bracket
and you go and close your curly bracket.
And that is what is referred to as
the object literal syntax.
You can also use this syntax
where you say new capital O object.
You open up your parenthesis
and then close your parenthesis.
And then you pass curly bracket
with each property and value along with it.
Now you probably won't see that notation
all that often or ever
simply because the object literal syntax
is much cleaner.
Same thing why you can technically do like
const name is equal to new string.
And that's just another way to create a string.
But we don't do that
we just do single quotes
which is the string literal syntax.
So when we're creating objects
we will create just curly brackets.
We'll talk about that new keyword
in coming videos.
And that's what we have.
Now keywords here.
Property on the left
colon
and then we have the value on the right.
The values of an object can be any type.
Meaning they can be a string,
they can be a boolean,
they can be a number,
they can be other objects,
they can be other arrays.
Pretty, any type you can think of.
Think of any type in the world right now
and it could be that type.
Okay (laughs)
So let's take a look at
like maybe we have a variable.
Const
Age is equal to 100.
Now if I want to take the value
of age and put it into this person
we can swap out the hard coded 100
with a variable of age.
Let me take a look at that.
You see the 100s being passed on.
That's a pretty common thing that we'll do.
Now if you ever run into this situation,
where the property is the same name
as the value variable that you're setting it to.
You can simply get away with simply doing age.
Like that.
And that's the exact same thing as age
saying age, age.
If I was in a dot js file here,
my Prettier would automatically be like
"Okay let's a little bit redundant",
so you can simply just pass it.
Like that.
The properties of an object can
they pretty much follow the same rules
as variables.
And I'm gonna recommend that
you use the same rules as you name your variables.
However, you can
you go a little bit further with
the properties on an object.
Where if you put these in quotes
and we were to say
cool dash dude.
And let's say true,
you can set that to a boolean,
refresh.
You'll see that there is a property
with a dash in it.
You cannot have variables with a dash in it.
But you can have properties.
Similarly you can also have
spaces in your properties.
Really cool,
false.
And you can have numbers.
If you were to put them in the string.
I guess it's not technically a number there
but it's a string of seven, seven, seven.
And you'll see that, that is in there.
You'll notice that I'm putting,
let me see that they're available there.
We'll talk about how to get to them.
Hey look at that!
That's a perfect example!
That seven, seven, seven.
They put that at the top.
Whereas I put it here
because you can't trust the order of the properties
in an object.
You'll notice that I'm putting commas
after every single one of these.
And I'm gonna recommend that you put
this on the end.
After any time you put a property value
just put a comma on the end.
Even if there's nothing to come after it.
It's not totally necessary.
You see it work just fine there.
But putting a trail end comma on there,
what that will do is it will make sure
that the next time you come around
and add in
a dog
of Snickers
it will allow us to easily add it.
Watch this it will work just fine.
What happens all the time is
if you don't do that,
and it's called
a trail end comma or a comma dangle
it's often called.
If you don't put that on there
then you'll come around in like
I don't know
two months.
You'll be like "Alright just pop a new value in there"
and give it a save and then (makes a buzzer sound)
"unexpected identifier online 20".
And you're, you look at this and like
"What's wrong with that?
It looks fine. Dog.
That's a good, that's a property value.".
And it's because you forgot the comma.
The other sort of gotcha there is that
if you are using a version control system
like Git,
and let's say we had this.
And somebody comes around and
needs to add a dog property to it.
What they have to do
is they have to modify this line
by adding a comma.
And then they also have to modify this line
to add the new property value.
And what you've done there is
you've not really modified this line of to how it works.
But you have added a comma.
So if you do what's called a Git blame.
And a Git blame will show you
who wrote that line of code.
Then the Git blame will fall on you.
Even though somebody else
probably has written that line of code.
So always put a comma dangle on there.
You'll probably see me forget it.
And that's because I'm an old-timer.
And you previously could not put
a comma dangle on the end
it would break.
But now all modern browsers support
putting a comma dangle on there.
Other things you can do is
add nested properties or nested objects.
So if you were to add a sub-property
called like clothing.
And you can give it a sub-object.
And you can say like
shirts ten
pants two.
And if we open it up you see
our object has a nested object
called clothing
which is shirt and pants.
And you can nest
objects
as deep as you possibly could want.
There is sort of a gotcha around
copying objects or cloning objects
that we'll talk about in just a second.
Finally adding a property after the object has been created
is totally possible.
You can just go to person.
And you can use the dot notation
to add a new property.
So if I were to
put a
job property on that person.
And say Web Developer.
Now if we take a look at this.
Open it up.
You see the job property has been added.
Similarly,
if you were to try to over-write a property
you can do that as well.
So we could say
person dot age is equal to 50.
You see that the age property
has been over-written on that.
You might be saying right now
"But hold on Wes,
you created that with a const.
Doesn't const mean it cannot be changed?
And you just went ahead and changed part of it."
Well, that's kind of a gotcha in JavaScript.
Const does not mean
that the value of an object cannot be changed.
Const means that the binding to that person
cannot be changed.
What does that mean?
Well if I,
let's change this variable to Wes.
Right?
I am Wes.
I have been born
this is my object.
Properties about me can change as I grow up.
However, no one can ever replace me.
(laughs)
Not in that way but I'm sure there's
plenty of other people that can
record mediocre screen casts like I do.
But no one can ever over-write
the binding to me.
Meaning that no one can ever come across
and say like "Oh a new Wes was born."
And we're going to say like
the name is Westopher.
And the age is 12.
And the job is a Web Master.
Right.
You can't do that.
Then watch.
Assignment to a constant variable.
Why?
Because I try to make a new const.
Even if I put the const in front of it.
That won't work.
Because the binding to Wes
has already been created.
And even though properties on me can change
the actual object itself can never be over-written entirely.
If you do ever want to
sort of
freeze the values in an object.
What you can do is
you can create a frozen object.
So const Wes froze is equal to,
and you would use capital O object dot freeze.
And you pass it
the object that you wish to freeze.
Now that's not going to freeze
the original Wes.
But what that will do is it will return a new object
called Wes froze.
And that can never be changed.
So age is equal to 100.
And now if I take a look at Wes froze
you see that the age was never actually changed.
So if that's the case
where you wanna make this sort of,
the word that we use is called immutable,
meaning that you cannot change the
mutation is changing a value.
And if you wanna make something immutable,
not changeable,
then you can freeze that entire object
with object dot freeze.
Now talking about accessing properties.
I've shown you one way to
sort of access a property.
And that is with the dot notation.
If you do want to access a property on something
you can just Wes dot job.
Wes dot age.
Wes dot clothing.
And we get access to all of the values.
So just like,
just like we looked at on our DOM elements.
How we have setters and getters.
That is the exact same thing
in an object.
In fact a DOM element is just an object
with a little bit of extra functionality added to it.
So that is the first way.
And that is probably in
almost every use case you will
probably be using dot notation.
However, we have this other notation
to access properties.
And that is with square brackets.
So if you need to access a property
you can also do
let's just console log here.
We can say Wes dot age.
And we can also use
Wes
square bracket.
And then you give it a string
which is the property that we want.
So age.
Now why do we have that?
That seems like a much uglier way
to actually access the properties.
Well, we have that because
if you want to programmatically call up
a property.
Like maybe we were to say
const
property
to check
is equal to.
And we use prompt in this case to say
what do you want to check.
If we were to console log
the property to check.
Now watch this.
If I want to type in age.
It will give us the string of age.
So then what we can do is
we can replace this string
with the variable that has that value.
And that's not going to look
for
a property called
a property to check.
Never.
What it's going to do
is it's going to just use the string
in that variable
as a property look-up.
So if I type in age,
it returns 50.
If I type in dog,
it gives me Snicker.
If I type in clothing,
it gives me the object that is the clothing.
So that's one reason why we have
square bracket notation.
When the property
of
the object
is stored in a variable, because you can't simply just say
Wes dot property to check.
Because then that will literally look for
a property called property to check.
Right?
I feel like that's the reason that I added it there.
To show you that it will literally
look for that property on the object.
So if that's the case
then we need to use square brackets
to reference the name of that.
The other reason is that
sometimes, and this probably isn't a good idea but,
sometimes if the properties of your object are not
referenceable via JavaScript
you have to use a string.
Like I cannot,
let me get this prompt outta here.
Get rid, ah I'll just comment those out.
If I go here I can obviously type Wes dot age.
But I cannot type
Wes dot
cool
dude.
I cannot type Wes dot really cool.
And I cannot type Wes dot seven, seven, seven.
Because those are
invalid property look-ups.
And if that's the case for all three of those,
you would have to use square bracket notation
to be able to access that.
So. Like, why is that there?
That's probably not a really good idea.
Well, sometimes you get data that
comes from maybe from another language,
or you get data that comes from the server side.
And if that's the case
you don't really have a whole lot of options.
So it comes in like this and you need to
use square bracket notation in order to reference it.
If you want to reference multiple levels deep
it's no different than that.
So we say Wes dot clothing.
That's our object.
But we can go one level deep
and find
the nested properties.
So dot notation as deep as we can go.
The only gotcha that we have there is
that we say Wes dot,
let's say we have Wes dot jobs like an object.
That doesn't exist. Right?
And if that's the case it just says "undefined".
There is no jobs property on Wes.
However, if I try to go to Wes dot jobs dot main.
Like what's my main job.
Or Wes dot jobs dot side job.
It will actually "error".
And that's because,
and this is a super common one,
"cannot read property side of undefined".
That's because there is no property
that exists on this undefined value.
Right?
Wes dot jobs is undefined so
there's no properties that live inside of that.
If that's the case.
Then you have to say
Wes dot jobs question mark
Wes dot jobs dot side.
Otherwise, jobs doesn't
exist.
Oh, shoulda used (indistinguishable) there.
And then we get "Wes dot jobs doesn't exist".
There is a proposal
and hopefully this will be out soon.
I'll cut into this video right now
if this now exists.
But there is a proposal where
we'll be able to do what's called a
a deep check.
Where what it will do
is it will check like you can do something like that.
And then that.
And then check for the property.
And what that will do is to say
does Wes exist, if so, check for jobs.
Does jobs exist?
Yes.
If so, then check for side.
And that will allow us to do many levels deep.
Because it's often the case where
we have to say like,
if Wes dot jobs or
if Wes
and Wes dot jobs
and
Wes dot jobs dot first.
Then go ahead and display the first job.
And sometimes we don't know if any of these exist.
So what we have to do is check one, by one, by one.
Otherwise we're gonna run into these errors.
But
hopefully, in,
I don't know,
a year from when I'm recording this,
this will exist in the language
and everything will be great.
We'll often use this if statement for
using on inputs.
So if I go up here.
And right above my scripts
give myself an input
with the name of
let's say
name of first.
Right? We got a little input here.
You can go ahead and type into it.
Often what will happen is
we'll try to select that thing.
So const name input
is equal to document dot query selector.
And we'll say give me where the name
is equal to first.
And then we'll console log.
Name input dot value.
So maybe it'll put that in a variable const.
Name is equal to name input dot value.
And then we'll console log the name.
So nothing's there.
Maybe we should put a value in there
so it runs on page load.
Value is equal to Wes.
Now you see we see Wes on page load.
Now if that didn't exist,
if that input was not on the page,
we get an error
"cannot read property value of null".
What?
Well, well let me show you what happens there.
Name input
console log
name input.
And we get "null".
Why? Because the name input is not on the page.
If it was it would actually give us the input.
There we go.
And then it checks for a property on it
called value.
So if this was the case, and you run into this all the time,
what we have to do is say
if name input.
Then we'll say const name
is equal to name input dot value
or now we've just created a scoped variable
to this if statement
which is not very good cause we can't use it outside.
So we do something like this.
Const name is equal to
and we first check if name input exists.
If that is true
we take the name input and return the value.
Otherwise, we just return it into empty string.
Console log then name.
In this case
it's just an empty string.
But, if this did exist.
You see.
We have the string of Wes.
So that's a pretty common thing to do.
Hopefully, that will be solved
at some point.
To remove a property from an object
you use the delete key.
So not the key on your keyboard, but,
the literal word delete.
You say Wes dot job.
And that will go ahead and delete the actual property.
If you're curious of if it worked or not,
you can save the results in a variable
or simply just console dot log it.
Because a delete will either return true or false
as to if it's deleted or not.
Now if we take a look at Wes dot job
you'll see that it is undefined.
Sometimes you'll also see people setting values
to be null or undefined.
So Wes dot age is undefined
or Wes dot age is equal to null.
Those are not deleting the properties.
They are simply setting them
to be
null
or undefined.
Which in some frameworks,
in some cases
will just allow the thing to skip over it.
Talking about iterating
or looping over an object in each of its properties.
We will talk about the different types of loops
in an upcoming video called "Looping".
It's a pretty common thing
to wanna loop over the data that is inside of an object,
or in an array.
Now let's talk about methods.
We've talked about methods a whole bunch
so probably you already know.
Say it to me now.
What's the difference between a method
and a function?
Well, a method is just a function
that lives inside of an object.
That's as much as we know so far.
But if we go back up to this Wes right here.
And we make a say hello
property.
We can set that to a function.
And
that function could take in a greeting
if we want.
You can set that greeting,
this is the same as any function that you would have,
you could set the default greeting to be
"Hey".
And then from that we return
let's just return.
Greeting.
And then.
Look at this.
Ready? This dot name.
Boom!
Ready?
We're gonna go in here and say Wes dot say hello.
Says "hey Wes" if I pass it.
Hello.
And it will tell me "hello Wes".
Now. What is this?
Literally.
What is this?
I've told you in the past
if we take a look at a method
and if you look to the left of the dot.
This will always be equal to the left of the dot.
So in our case
this is going to be equal to Wes.
And we can reference other properties
on Wes with simply
this dot name.
And the reason why we don't say just like
Wes dot name
is because when we get into prototyping
you're actually gonna see how we can use these methods
on like
multiple people rather than just a person named Wes.
But we could create a
sort of a person object that could be created
in new instance for Wes
and for Scott
and for Kate
and for Snickers.
And then in that case
this method will be on all of them
and we can reference the current person with
this dot name.
So we'll go into that a lot more in the future
once we hit the prototypes.
But just know that you have
when you have a function
that lives on a property
in an object
that is referred to as a method of that object.
Now there also is a method shorthand.
Just like how we looked at the shorthand
right here for age.
We can similarly also do shorthand
where we take the function word away.
We take the colon away.
And that's what we have.
So this is method shorthand.
It is the exact same thing as saying
colon function.
It is not an arrow function.
You can put arrow functions,
make one called sneeze
and set that to be an arrow function.
We'll console log.
Aaachooooo!
And if that's the case
you would say Wes dot sneeze.
That is still a method.
However, because it is an arrow function
as a property
on an object.
We do not have access to the this keyword. Right?
Watch this.
If we run it.
This is equal to window.
Now if I were to change that
to a regular function.
This is equal to
to Wes.
Right?
And look
And I know we keep saying this
but we'll go into why that is.
The short answer here
is that arrow functions
do not scope this
to the thing that they're called against.
And the parent scope will inherit this.
Let's get sneeze outta here.
That's silly.
So that is a high level overview
of what objects are.
In the next coupla videos
we're gonna go into a little bit more deeper things.
Things that you need to know.
A lot o little gotchas about JavaScript.
Before we then dive into arrays.